INTRODUCTION TO TKINTER
What is Tkinter:
Tkinter is the standard GUI(Graphical User Interface) library for python. It provides a fast and easy way to create desktop applications with graphical elements like buttons, labels, textboxes, and more.

WHAT CAN YOU BUILD WITH TKINTER:
1. Desktop tools(e.g calculators, to-do apps)
2. form-based applications (e.g login systems)
3. Games and simple interactive programs
4. Drawing apps or visual tools

INFORMATION ON ROOT WINDOW EXERCISES
import tkinter as tk

#How to exit full screen
def exit_fullscreen(event=None):event=None is used to make full screen responsive by responding to Esc key
  root.attributes('-fullscreen',False)

root = tk.Tk()#This creates the main window
root.title("First tkinter")
root.geometry("400x400+400+100")#plus 200 x-offset shift tkinter window to left while plus 300 y-offset shift tkinter window down
root.iconbitmap("mypic.ico")#used to change tkinter icon
#root.resizable(width=False,height=False)
#root.minsize(width=400,height=300)#minimumsize of the window
#root.maxsize(width=1200,height=800)#maxsize of the window
#root.attributes('-fullscreen',True)#set transpanrency level.This creates full window.

root.attributes('-fullscreen',True)

#How to bind the full screen
root.bind('<Escape>',exit_fullscreen)

root.mainloop()#Runs the application

TKINTER LABEL WIDGET
The Label widget in python's tkinter library is used to display text or images in a GUI application. It is one of the most basic widgets, often used to provide information or captions

Key Features of Label
1. It is used to display static text or images
2. It is used to customize appearance using properties like font, color, size etc.
3.It can serve as a placeholder or provide feedback in an application.

Label syntax
Label(parent, text, options). options like font,bg,fg etc.


IMAGE DISPLAY IN THE TKINTER
from PILL import imageTk,image
NB:Tkinter supports only png and jpg format for image.
original_image = image.open("mypic.jpg")
image_resized = original_image.resized((50,50))
image_rotate = image_resized.rotate(45)
get_image = imageTK.Photoimage(image_resized)
my_label = Label(root, image=get_image)

TKINTER FRAME WIZARD
A frame in tkinter is a container widget used to group and organize other widgets. It acts as a rectangular region on the screen where you can place other widgets such as buttons, labels,and text fields. Frames are espacially useful for creating complex layouts by dividing the window into manageable sections.

KEY FEATURES OF Frames
1. Container: Frames are primarily used as containers to organize widgets hierarchically.
2. Styling: You can customize the frame's appearance using properties like background color, border width, and relief styles.
3. Parenting: A frame can act as a parent to other widgets, allowing you to nest frames for complex layouts.

COMMON ATTRIBUTES
1. bg: backgground color of the frame
2. width and height: Set the dimensions of the frame
3. relief: Specifies the border style (e.g "flat","raised","sunken","groove","ridge")
4. borderwidth: Sets the width of the border.

fiil="y" fill frame to y-direction
side=LEFT put the frame to left side.


BUTTON WIDGET
In tkinter, a Button widget is used to create a button that users can click to trigger a specific action or event in a GUI application. The Button widget comes with several configurable options, allowing you to customize its appearance and behavior.

BUTTON WIDGET EXPLANATION
1. Text: The label displayed on the button.
2. Command: A function or method to be executed when the button is clicked.
3. width/height:Size of the button in terms of characters.
4. fg/bg: Foreground and background colors of the button.
5. font: The font style of the button text.
6. State: The state of the button, e.g NORMAL(default), DISABLED.

RAISED: It can be used as tk.RAISED OR relief="raised"
fill: It can be used as tk.BOTH for x and y or fill="y", fill="x"


TKINTER ENTRY WIDGET(ENTRY WIZARD)
The Entry widget in Tkinter is used to accept single-line text input from the user. It is commonly used for entring names, passwords, email, numbers, etc.

Syntax:
entry = Entry(master,options)
1. master: The parent container like root or a frame.
2. options: Configuration parameters to customize the widget such as font,bg,fg etc.
show="*" when this is used while typing a string, star will be showing instead of the string.
name_var = StringVar() stores string. In Entry,use textvariable=name_var


TEXT WIDGET (MULTI-LINE INPUT/DISPLAY)
The 'Text' widget in Tkinter allows users to enter or display multiple lines of text. It is like a notepad-style field and supports advanced formatting, tags, and scrolling.
Syntax:
text_widget = Text(master, options)
label = Label(root, text=text.get("1.0",END)) 1 stands for line 1 while 0 stands for zero character.


MESSAGE WIDGET IN TKINTER
The Message widget is similar to the label, but designed specifically for longer blocks of text. Unlike Label, it wraps text automatically, making it ideal for displaying multi-line static text like instructions or warnings.
Syntax:
msg=Message(master, text="Your long message here",options)
Practically: Two widgets used to display text are:
1. Label
2. Message
relief is used for formatting text.


LAYOUT MANAGEMENT IN TKINTER
Tkinter offers three main layout managers:
1. pack()
2. grid()
3. place()
You can also nest layouts using Frames inside Frames.

PACK()
The pack() geometry manager is one of the simplest ways to position widgets in a window. It automatically arranges widgets relative to each other in one of four directions: top, bottom, left, or right.
Basic Syntax:
widget.pack(options) options such as side(top,bottom,left,right),fill(expand widget to fill x,y,or BOTH),expand allow the widget to expand to fill any extra space in the geometry master, padx(Add horizontal padding),pady(Add vertical padding).


WHAT IS GRID LAYOUT IN TKINTER?
The grid() layout geometry manager arranges widgets in a tabular (grid-like) structure using rows and columns. It gives you fine control over where each widget appears.
Baisc Syntax:
widget.grid(row=0,column=0,options). options such as rowspan(It indicates how many rows the widget should span),columnspan(It indicates how many columns the widget should span),sticky(Aligns the widget N,S,E,W or combination of nsew),padx,pady,ipadx/ipady(Internal padding(space inside the widget)).

KEY ADVANTAGES OF grid()
1. It is better for form-style layouts (login forms,calculators, etc).
2. You can align widgets precisely using rows and columns.
3. Sticky helps to align widget inside its cell(e.g sticky=W aligns left).

IMPORTANT RULE ABOUT GRID()
Do not pack() and grid() in the same container (i.e, same frame or root window).
padx gives external space along x-axis while pady gives external space along y-axis.
row is vertically while column is horizontally.


WHAT IS STICKY IN GRID()
In Tkinter's grid() layout, each cell is like a box, and by default, a widget sits in the center of that box. The sticky option is used to stick the widget to a specific side (or sides) of the cell:
1. N = Top (North)
2. S = Bottom (South)
3. E = Right (East)
4. W = Left (West)

You can combine directions:
1. sticky = "WE" Stretch horizontally
2. sticky = "NS" Stretch vertically
3. sticky = "NSEW" fill entire cell
padx and pady are like margins.



WHAT IS place() in TKINTER?
The place() geometry manager is used to position widgets explicitly at specific coordinates or relative positions inside their parent widget (like root or Frame). Unlike pack() and grid(), which manage layout automatically, place() is manual positioning.

Basic Syntax:
widget.place(x=50,y=100).

You can also use relative positioning:
  widget.place(relx=0.5,rely=0.5,anchor='center'). It has options such as x(Absolute horizontal position(pixels from the left)),y(Absolute vertical position (pixels from the top)), relx(Relative horizontal position (0.0 to 1.0 of the parent width)), rely(Relative vertical position (0.0 to 1.0 of the parent height)), width(Absolute width of the widget), height(Absolute height of the widget), anchor(Controls where the widget is anchored (e.g 'center','n','ne')).

When to use place()
1. When you need pixel-perfect layouts.
2. When designing custom interfaces or games.
3. Avoid using it for responsive forms or dynamic resizing-it doesn't adapt automatically.

SUMMARY:
1. place() lets you manually position widgets.
2. Supports both absolute(x,y) and relative (relx.rely) positioning.
3. Use anchor to control how the widget aligns its point.
4. Gives full control, but requires more effort for responsive design.



WHAT ARE NESTED LAYOUTS?
In Tkinter, you can nest Frames inside each other, and assign different layout managers (pack(), grid(), and place()) to each one. This approach is useful when you want to:
1. Organize the UI into sections.
2. Apply different layouts to each section.
3. Create complex, clean, and manageable interfaces.

BENEFITS OF NESTED LAYOUTS
1. Modular UI - Each section is clean and separated.
2. Flexible design - Mix pack,grid,place as needed (in separate frames).
3. Maintainability - Easier to read and update complex interfaces.

IMPORTANT RULE:
Never mix pack() and grid() in the same container (e.g same frame). But you can use pack() in one Frame and grid() in another.


TKINTER WIDGETS - PART2(ADVANCED)
We will learn the following:
1. Checkbutton
2. Radiobutton
3. Listbox
4. Combobox(via ttk)
5. Spinbox
6. Scale
7. Progressbar(via ttk)
8. Menu and Submenus
9. Separator, PanedWidth, Notebook(Tabs)


TKINTER CHECKBUTTON WIDGET
The Checkbutton in Tkinter lets the user toggle an option ON or OFF - similar to a checkbox in web forms.

KEY FEATURES OF CHECKBUTTON:
1. It can be checked (value = 1) or unchecked (value = 0).
2. It is used for multiple independent options.
3. It can be linked to a variable(IntVar,StringVar, or BooleanVar) to track its state.

CHECKBUTTON IMPORTANT parameters
text(The label shown next to the checkbutton),variable(variable(IntVar, StringVar) storing checkbutton state),onvalue(Value when checked (default is 1)), offvalue(Value when unchecked(default is 0)), Command(Function to call when state changes), state(Use "disabled" to disable interaction).

WHERE CHECKBUTTON IS USED:
1. Agreeing to terms and conditions.
2. Selecting features or references.
3. Setting toggles (e.g notifications, dark mode)
4. Multiple choice questions ( with multiple correct answers).


TKINTER RADIOBUTTON WIDGET
The Radiobutton in Tkinter allows the user to select one option from a group - just like radio buttons in HTML forms.

KEY FEATURES OF RADIOBUTTON
1. Used when you want the user to choose only one option from multiple choices.
2. All related Radiobuttons share the same variable (usually StringVar or IntVar).
3. Each button has a unique value that gets stored in that variable when selected.

IMPORTANT PARAMETERS OF RADIOBUTTON
text(Label for the radio button), variable(Shared variable to track selected value),value(Unique value assigned to that option),command(Function to run when selection changes),state("disabled") or "normal" to disable/enable option, indicator on(Set to 0 for button-like radio look (advanced UI)).

USAGE OF RADIOBUTTON
1. Gender, age group, or user role selection.
2. Quiz with single correct answer.
3. Theme selector (Light/Dark/System).
4. Language selection.


TKINTER LISTBOX WIDGET
The Listbox widget in Tkinter is used to display a list of items, allowing the user to select one or more.

KEY FEATURES OF LISTBOX
1. You can allow single or multiple selections.
2. Items can be added,removed, or modified.
3. Useful for displaying options, menus, files, etc.

LISTBOX PARAMETERS
height(Number of visible rows),selectmode(SINGLE,BROWSE,MULTIPLE, OR EXTENDED),bg/fg(Background and text color),exportselection(if False,selection persists when focus changes).

LISTBOX SELECTMODE options
SINGLE(User can select only one item by clicking),BROWSE(Like SINGLE, but allows clikc-drag to browse selections), MULTIPLE(User can select multiple items, clicking each one separately),EXTENDED(User can select ranges using shift (range) and Ctrl(mult)).

COMMON USE CASES OF LISTBOX
1. Select multiple files
2. Choose items from a long list
3. Forms with multi-option inputs
4. Dynamic content selectors (e.g countries, hobbies)


COMBOBOX (via ttk) in TKINTER
The ttk.Combobox is a drop-down list widget from the ttk(Themed Tkinter) module. It allows users to choose a single item from a predefined list of options, just like HTML's <select> tag.

KEY FEATURES OF ttk.Combobox
1. Drop-down with auto-complete(optional).
2. Can be editable or read-only.
3. Comes from the ttk module, so it has a modern look.
NB:To avoid displaying items one after the other,use label.config(text=f"You selected: {Selected}") as example.

COMMON COMBOBOX OPTIONS:
values(List of items shown in the dropdown),state(Set to randomly to prevent typing), get(Returns the currently selected value), current(n):Set the index of the selected value,set(val):Sets the displayed value programmatically.
NB: This state='readonly' prevents typing in the combobox.

USE CASES OF COMBOBOX
1. Country or language selection.
2. Theme or mode switching.
3. Dropdown filter options.


TKINTER SPINBOX - WIDGET
The Spinbox widget in Tkinter lets users choose from a range of values using small up/down arrow buttons. It is often used when input is numeric or limited to specific options.

KEY FEATURES OF SPINBOX
1. Allows incremental input using arrows.
2. Accepts only values withing a defined range or a fixed set of choices.
3. Prevents invalid entries (when properly validated).

USEFUL OPTIONS FOR SPINBOX
from_:Minimum value (if using numeric range),to:Maximum value, values:Tuple or list of custom values, increment:Step size between values (e.g 0.5), command: Function to call when value is changed, width: Width of the input field, state: "normal" or "readonly", wrap:If true, wraps around when limits hit.

USE CASES OF SPINBOX
1. Selecting quantity or count.
2. Choosing time, date, or rating.
3. Replacing text entry with controlled input.


TKINTER SCALE WIDGET - FULL EXPLANATION
The Scale widget in Tkinter provides a slider control for selecting a numerical value in a range. It is great for inputting numbers with visual feedback - like volume,brightness, or speed settings.

KEY FEATURES OF SCALE
1. Selects a continous or stepped value.
2. Can be horizontal or vertical.
3. Shows a handle that users can drag.
4. Supports callback functions when the value changes.

PARAMETERS TO BE USED WITH SCALE
from_:Minimum value of the scale (e.g 0), to: Maximum value (e.g 100), orient: HORIZONTAL or VERTICAL orientation, command: Function called when slider is moved, resolution: Step size (e.g 0.5 for decimal steps), length: Length of the slider in pixels, tickinterval:Marks intervals on the scale, label:Label text to show above the scale.
NB: WHEN DEALING WITH SCALE:
def show_scale(val):
   label.config(text=f"selected: {val})

Scale(root, text="selected: 0", command=show_scale)
Label(root, text="selected: 0").pack()

USE CASES FOR SCALE
1. Audio volume control.
2. Image zoom level.
3. Brightness/contrast adjustment.
4. Game speed or difficulty.


PROGRESSBAR IN TKINTER (via ttk)
The Progressbar widget from tkinter.ttk provides a visual representation of the progress of a long-running task. It can operate in two modes:
MODES OF PROGRESSBAR:
1. determinate: shows actual progress (0% to 100%).
2. indeterminate: shows motion without indicating how much is done (used when you do not know the duration).

COMMON OPTIONS FOR PROGRESSBAR
orient: HORIZONTAL or VERTICAL, length: Length of the bar in pixels, mode: determinate or indeterminate, maximum:Maximum value for the bar, value: Current progress (0 to maximum).

USE CASES FOR PROGRESSBAR
1. File download.
2. Task completion.
3. Loading screens.
4. Installers or batch operations.


MENUS AND SUBMENUS IN TKINTER
WHAT IS A MENU: A Menu in Tkinter is a drop down list of options located usually at the top of the window (like File, Edit, Help in most applications). SUBMENUS are nested menus that appear when you hover over a menu option.

HOW TO CREATE A MENU
1. Create a menu object.
2. Assign it to the main window using window.config(menu=menubar)
3. Add top-level menus(e.g File, Edit,Help,View, etc; These appear at the menu bar) using add_cascade.
4. Add commands or submenus using add_command, add_separator,etc.

MENU: KEY METHODS AND THEIR ROLES
1. Menu():Creates a new menu.
2. add_command(label,command): Adds an actionable item. It is used to add submenus
3. add_cascade(label,menu):Adds a submenu.
4. add_separator():Adds a horizontal line.
5. tearoff=0: Removes the dashed line at the top of the menu(optional).
6. root.config(menu=menubar):Links the menu bar to the main window.


SEPARATOR, PANEDWINDOW, Notebook
1. ttk.Separator:
Purpose: A thin line used to visually separate different sections of your GUI (horizontal or vertical).
Syntax:
ttk.Separator(parent,orient='horizontal' or 'vertical')

2. PanedWindow:
Purpose: A container that divides the window into movable resizable panes. You can add multiple widgets inside it.
Syntax:
PanedWindow(parent,orient=HORIZONTAL or VERTICAL)
pw.pack(fill=BOTH,expand=1)#expand=1 tells the master widget to allocate any extra sreen space to that specific widget if the window is resized larger.

3. ttk.Notebook
Purpose: ttk.Notebook is used to create tabbed interfaces, similar to browser tabs or settings dialogs.
Syntax:
notebook = ttk.Notebook(parent)
notebook.add(child_frame,text="Tab Name")


TKINTER EVENT HANDLING
1. Command Binding(Simpler Method) in Tkinter: Command binding is the most basic and beginner-friendly way to handle events in Tkinter. It's typical used with widgets like Button, Checkbutton, Radiobutton, and Menu.

Concept:
You assign a function (also called a "callback") to a widget using the command parameter. When the user interacts with that widget(e.g clicks a button), the function is executed.

Syntax:
widget = Widget(root,...,command=function_name)
1. function_name is passed without parentheses, so it's not executed immediately.
2. The function cannot take arguments unless wrapped (e.g with lambda).


LIMITATIONS OF COMMAND:
1. No event info: You do not get details like which key or mouse button was used.
2. No advanced control: You can't detect mouse position or keyboard input - for that, use bind() instead.

USE CASES:
1. Buttons: Submit,Save,Cancel, etc.
2. Menus: File >> Exit.
3. Simple click actions that don't need event data.


USING THE bind() METHOD(ADVANCED METHOD)
The bind() method lets you attach an event handler to a widget so it can react to mouse events, keyborad events, or other special triggers.
Syntax:
widget.bind("<event>",handler_function)
1. <event>: Event description in angle brackets ("<Button-1>","<key>", etc)
2. handler_function: Function that is called when the event happens.
3. Must accept one parameter: The event object.

COMMON EVENT STRINGS
<Buuton-1>: Left mouse click.
<Button-2>: Middle click.
<Button-3>: Right click.
<Double-Button-1>: Double left click.
<B1-Motion>: Mouse drag with left button.
<Enter>: Cursor enters widget.
<Leave>: Cursor leaves widget.

COMMON KEYBOARD EVENT STRINGS
<Key>:Any key.
<Return>: Enter key.
<Escape>: Escape key.
<Up>:Up arrow key.
<Down>: Down arrow key.
<Control-a>:Ctrl+A
#lambda e holds the program from executing immediately you run the program.


Focus, Grap, and Widget State
1. FOCUS: Focus determines which widget receives keyboard events. Only one widget can have focus at a time.

Common focus methods:
1. .focus_set(): Gives keyboard focus to this widget.
2. .focus_get(): Returns the widget that currently has focus.
3. .focus_force()
: Forces focus (even if the window is inactive). Focus is for Entry field but setting focus first is at button with the help of command =lambda: field_name.focus_set()

2. Grab: Grab captures all events for a specific widget - useful for modal dialogs where you want to block interaction with other windows/widgets.

Grap methods:
1. grab_set(): Widget captures all events until released.
2. grab_release(): Release the grab.
3. grab_current(): Returns the widget that has grab.

3. Widget State: Some widgets (Button, Entry, etc) have a state option that controls if they can be used.
Common states:
1. NORMAL: Fully functional.
2. DISABLED: Greyed out, cannot be clicked or typed in.
3. ACTIVE: Mouse is hovering (usually for styling).

Here's a small Tkinter app that uses bind()
1. Mouse drag: Draws lines on the canvas.
2. keyboard press: Changes the pen color.

TKINTER VARIABLES AND DATA Binding
Tkinter provides special variable classes (StringVar, IntVar, DoubleVar, BooleanVar) that act as wrappers around normal Python values. These allow two-way data binding between your Python code and widgets - meaning:
1. When the variable changes, the widget updates automatically.
2. When the widget value changes, the variable updates automatically.

Varaiable Classes are: StringVar() stores Text/strings e.g 'Hello',IntVar() stores integers e.g 42, DoubleVar() stores floating numbers e.g 3.14, BooleanVar() stores True/False e.g TRUE